Spec proposal for opt-in feature where PrivateAssets flag option indepdent from IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets options (#12313)
NuGet/Home: proposed/2022/PrivateAssetIndepdentFromExcludeAsset.md

# Opt-in `PrivateAssets` asset flow control option precedence over `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option

- Author Name <https://github.com/erdembayar>
- Start Date 2022-12-07
- GitHub Issue <https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938>
- GitHub PR <https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4976>

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph description of the proposal. -->

> Currently `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options take precedence over `PrivateAssets` asset control option when creating package, so in many cases `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options completely eclipse the `PrivateAssets` option so doesn't let assets flow to consuming parent project. This proposal introduces new a `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` opt-in property so it let `PrivateAssets` asset control option takes precedence over `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options to enable asset flow to consuming parent projects.

Reviewer: Your doc refers to `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` as a property, but the only sample snippet of its use uses it as *metadata* on the `PackageReference` item. That's fine, but two thoughts on this:
1. Maybe the opt-in should be at the project level via an actual property. Unless you can think of a case where folks would want to opt in on just one particular reference. Personally, I'll be planning on opting entire repos into this setting rather than try to make sense of specific references having different behavior.
2. If you do keep it as item metadata, will it be harmless to add that metadata to *all* `PackageReference` items, such that I can add it to an `ItemDefinition` group so I can get the desired behavior everywhere, although I don't specify some of the other attributes like `PrivateAssets` or `IncludeAssets` on every `PackageReference` item?

Author: Sorry for misunderstanding, actually it's actual property/switch, it's not metadata on PackageReference item.
So, it applies to whole project if you set it `true` and you can opt-in entire repos with `Directory.packages.props` file.
I just clarified the [#Examples](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/blob/19bd26ecfc86a6d8d576c8cbdb29538867f24f7e/proposed/2022/PrivateAssetIndepdentFromExcludeAsset.md#examples) sections, it would be used like below:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PackPrivateAssetsFlow>True</PackPrivateAssetsFlow>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />    
  </ItemGroup>
```

## Motivation

<!-- Why are we doing this? What pain points does this solve? What is the expected outcome? -->
A package author should be able control which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as package. It enables parent projects to consume transitive packages without having to directly reference them, therefore it reduces the number of packages developers need to keep track of.

> We couldn't make this default experience because it'll break customers who rely on current behavior.

Reviewer: Have we determined that the existing behavior is in fact deterministic? My experiments suggest that it is perhaps not. If it isn't deterministic, then IMO it's broken and maybe we should fix that rather than add an opt-in property for getting deterministic behavior.

Author: Thank you for your feedback.
I tested what happens if we make this default experience, then [35-unit tests broken](https://devdiv.visualstudio.com/DevDiv/_build/results?buildId=7058885&view=ms.vss-test-web.build-test-results-tab). I believe it's quite a high number, so hesitate to make it default. 
Also, I mentioned in table `Functional explanation section` it might break some compile/runtime scenarios. Tbh I don't know how widespread it's that scenarios I mentioned there. 

- How about we make it opt-in for now and create a follow up issue for making it default experience. If a follow up issue gathers enough votes, then we can make it default experience that time.

- Alternative to this approach would be make this default experience and add Environment var for fall back to previous experience in case there’s regression for some customers.

Reviewer: > How about we make it opt-in for now and create a follow up issue for making it default experience. If a follow up issue gathers enough votes, then we can make it default experience that time.

Sounds good.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

> The new ` PackPrivateAssetsFlow` property only affects pack operation (more specifically nuspec in nupkg file), but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json` lock file.

Reviewer: So, this doesn't impact P2P references for this project? PackageReference in a project tends to propagate to 'parent' projects across P2P as well as those using PackageReference, and PrivateAssets impacts both of them. Is the fix required in both places? In other words, if I have a P2P to this project, and I set PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="all", does the parent project (via P2P) have the same problem that a packed project have? And if so shouldn't we fix that as well?

Author: Could you verify if I understood correctly? 
1. Create a parent project `ClassLibrary1` and reference the current project like below.
```  
<ItemGroup>
      <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="compile" />
  </ItemGroup>
```
2. Now pack the `ClassLibrary1` project.
Currently actual `nuspec` file from `ClassLibrary1.1.0.0.nupkg` looks like below:

```
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework="net7.0">
        <dependency id="refissue" version="1.0.0-beta" exclude="Runtime,Build,Native,Analyzers,BuildTransitive" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

I believe expected experience would be:

```
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework="net7.0">
        <dependency id="refissue" version="1.0.0-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

Thank you.

Reviewer: No, the scenario I'm thinking of doesn't pack `ClassLibrary1.csproj`. It's just a question of whether `ClassLibrary1` itself will get the assets from Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32 through `refissue.csproj` that are prescribed by the `PrivateAssets` attribute in `refissue.csproj`.

IOW, Consider that refissue.csproj has a PackageReference to CsWin32 with `PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="all"`. Then `ClassLibrary1.csproj` has a simple ProjectReference to `refissue.csproj`. What assets from CsWin32 will ClassLibrary1 get? I hope all of them, which is equivalent to what it would get if `ClassLibrary1` had a *Package*Reference to refissue.

Author: It looks like similar issue exists for P2P scenario, see diff screenshot at bottom.

1. Left side is referencing newly generated nupkg with opt-in property.  All assets are flowing to parent referencing project, including build `props` file.
```
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="refissue" Version="1.0.0-beta" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Package ref inside `refissue.csproj`:
```
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="all" />
  </ItemGroup>
```
2. Right side is just simple Project reference to `refissue.csproj`
```
  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Package ref inside `refissue.csproj`:
```
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="all" />
  </ItemGroup>

```
Below is prop file difference.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/206540935-898be4e0-6cb3-4d9c-a77e-84d6b4e60555.png)

Reviewer 2: the proposal for project-to-project should also cover where the opt-in in needs to be set, so cover the scenarios of:

P1 -> P2, and then the full truth table for what happens when each individual project opts in.

Reviewer 2: The name `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` would need some workshopping given the feedback.

Author: > The name PackPrivateAssetsFlow would need some workshopping given the feedback.

I renamed to `PrivateAssetIndependent` which I believe more represents what it does now.

Author: > the proposal for project-to-project should also cover where the opt-in in needs to be set, so cover the scenarios of:
P1 -> P2, and then the full truth table for what happens when each individual project opts in.

I added table, it's not full truth table. For example `Include` = `true` means Exclude = `false`. Please let me know if I need to extend it.

Reviewer 3: > So, this doesn't impact P2P references for this project?

Keep in mind that Include/Private/Exclude Assets does not work on P2P references: https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6098 (I'm sure there are other bugs too. This type of bug doesn't seem to have been de-duplicated well)

It would be great for that bug to be fixed, but it might be a lot more effort than implementing this feature only for PackageReference.

> I renamed to PrivateAssetIndependent which I believe more represents what it does now

I'm afraid that if I had not read the original feature request, that this name would not make any sense to me. From what I can tell, this feature is "treat PrivateAssets as transitive". However, for this exact reason, I don't like the feature proposal as is.  Normally, PrivateAssets means "use asset in current project, but do not flow transitively".  This feature is making it "do not use asset in current project and do flow transitively". In other words, it's completely inverting the meaning/intent of `PrivateAssets`.

Unless I still don't understand something well, I think we need to consider a different approach, as I think the current proposal will confuse customers.

Reviewer: > From what I can tell, this feature is "treat PrivateAssets as transitive"

I don't know what that would even mean. It isn't how I would summarize this. I would summarize the feature as "Respect PrivateAssets". It literally should just make nuget take PrivateAssets metadata at face-value rather than conflate it with include/exclude assets.

> Normally, PrivateAssets means "use asset in current project, but do not flow transitively".

This is incorrect. PrivateAssets says absolutely nothing about the use in the current project. It _only_ determines what assets from this reference bleed into parent projects or as nuget dependencies. 

> This feature is making it "do not use asset in current project and do flow transitively". In other words, it's completely inverting the meaning/intent of PrivateAssets.

Not at all. This new feature doesn't change the meaning of PrivateAssets at all. It just makes it so that if you *also* set Include/Exclude assets that these other metadata do not *also* silently change what flows, which is something PrivateAssets is supposed to control.

Author: Added P2P scenario in `summary` and `motivation`, `functional explanation` parts.
Please let me know if there anything still needs to be addressed.

Author: P2P scenario already included in spec.

Experience for parent consuming project would be affected by which asset from `compile, runtime, contentFiles, build, buildMultitargeting, buildTransitive, analyzers, native` are flowing into them.

For the following table assume `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` is set `true` when creating package, iterating possible scenarios (not full list) for consuming parent project.

| Asset flowing to parent project | New feature enabled | Possible downside |
|-----------------------|--------------|-----------------|
| compile | Expose new code, auto complete, intellicode, intellisense | Compile error due to naming ambiguity, run time error, NU1605 error |
| runtime | Let provide new runtime dependency | Run time error |

> | build | Enable source generator work | Build fails due to property/target value change |

Reviewer: Your table indicates build assets make source generators work. But actually source generators are just special analyzers, which you have a different row for. build controls msbuild imports only, I believe, and those imports can do anything an msbuild import file can do.

Author: Thank you, I clarified based on your feedback.

      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

### Technical explanation

We already have a [logic](hhttps://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets`, we just change precedence on that logic depending on opt-in property.

## Drawbacks

<!-- Why should we not do this? -->
- Might break some consuming projects, that is why it's opt-in feature. See table above for more details.

## Rationale and alternatives

<!-- Why is this the best design compared to other designs? -->
<!-- What other designs have been considered and why weren't they chosen? -->
<!-- What is the impact of not doing this? -->
- We could make it per package level control metadata. But could be hard to use if the customer want to opt-in for all package references in current project.

`<PackageReference Include="contoso" Version="1.1.1" PackPrivateAssetsFlow="true"/>`

- We could make it opt-in option in nuget.config file, but it doesn't give customer to option to opt in/out for per project level.

```.net
   <config>

>     <add key="PackPrivateAssetsFlow" value="true" />

Reviewer: I'm not a fan of this approach. An MSBuild property or metadata that you propose can already do repo-wide settings if that's what the customer wants.

Author: Sure, thank you for your feedback.

# Opt-in `PrivateAssets` asset flow control option precedence over `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option

- Author Name <https://github.com/erdembayar>
- Start Date 2022-12-07
- GitHub Issue <https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938>
- GitHub PR <https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4976>

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph description of the proposal. -->

> Currently `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options take precedence over `PrivateAssets` asset control option when creating package, so in many cases `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options completely eclipse the `PrivateAssets` option so doesn't let assets flow to consuming parent project. This proposal introduces new a `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` opt-in property so it let `PrivateAssets` asset control option takes precedence over `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options to enable asset flow to consuming parent projects.

Reviewer 2: They don't really take precedence, this isn't a precedence thing.

They are separate parts of a full picture.

> Currently `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options take precedence over `PrivateAssets` asset control option when creating package, so in many cases `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options completely eclipse the `PrivateAssets` option so doesn't let assets flow to consuming parent project. This proposal introduces new a `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` opt-in property so it let `PrivateAssets` asset control option takes precedence over `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options to enable asset flow to consuming parent projects.

Reviewer 3: Personally, I find this summary confusing, and doesn't convey what I currently understand the feature actually being about.  Maybe I still don't understand the feature proposal correctly, but here's what it currently is in my mind:

```suggestion
The `IncludeAssets`, `PrivateAssets` and `ExcludeAssets` metadata on `PackageReference` items control two different features. Firstly, which assets from a package that are included in the current project. Secondly, whether the assets will be listed in the package's dependency assets, for those assets to flow transitively, if the project is packed.

For example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0" PrivateAssets="all" />` means "Include the default assets in the current project, but if packed, all of the assets are excluded, so this package will not be a dependency".

Another example, `<PackageReference Include="NuGet.Protocol" Version="6.4.0" PrivateAssets="compile" />` means "include the default assets in the current project, but if packed, the "compile" asset should be excluded from the package dependency, so that my package's dependencies do not leak APIs into projects using my package".

A third example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Build" Version="17.0" ExcludeAssets="runtime" />` means "in the current project, make the `compile` assets available (so both intellisense and the compiler can access APIs from the package), but `Microsoft.Build`'s dlls are not copied to `bin` on build (`runtime` assets), and if the project is packed, then `runtime` assets also be excluded for the `Microsoft.Build` dependency for any project that references the current project's package.

However, a scenario that is missing is "exclude a package asset from a current project, but do not exclude it from the dependency when the current project is packed". This missing feature is more obvious when looking at a project/flow matrix:

||Flow transitively|Don't flow transitively|
|--|--|--|
|**Include in project**|IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|
|**Don't include in project**||ExcludeAssets|
```

Reviewer: I like your description and examples. The table you end with is less clear. You can include/exclude using either IncludeAssets or ExcludeAssets (just by listing the complement instead). PrivateAssets does *not* control what gets included in the project.
I think it _would_ be useful though to have such a truth table that shows everything about how these metadata can overlap (in particular, how Include/Exclude can influence/override what you set in PrivateAssets) in the default mode, and how the property changes this.

Author: @zivkan 
Thank you for great write up. I applied your suggestion.

@AArnott 
Could you check the modified table I added here?

Reviewer 2: Just plugging https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1044703269 :)

Author: > Just plugging [#12313 (comment)](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1044703269) :)

Yes, great summary for package consumption case. In addition, to that we're considering for P2P scenario too (it will impact parent projects that reference this project).

```
I think the best description of IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets and PrivateAssets is in https://github.com/NuGet/docs.microsoft.com-nuget/issues/2716#issuecomment-1092223183. 

As a project, `IncludeAssets` and `ExcludeAssets` indicate what I consume from a package. (EffectiveInclude)
As a project, `PrivateAssets` (today in combination with EffectiveInclude) indicates what projects that reference me consume. 

The ask is that EffectiveInclude is not combined with PrivateAssets
```

## Motivation

<!-- Why are we doing this? What pain points does this solve? What is the expected outcome? -->

> A package author should be able control which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as package. It enables parent projects to consume transitive packages without having to directly reference them, therefore it reduces the number of packages developers need to keep track of.

Reviewer 3: I don't follow the summary/motivation in this doc.

I'm not sure that my mental model of include/private/exclude assets are correct, but the way I think about it is:

Assets|Used by current project|Flows transitively
--|--|--
Include|yes|yes
Private|yes|no
Exclude|no|no

The only scenario that isn't covered (again, assuming my mental model is correct) is "current project does not use asset, but it transitive projects do". If that's right, would a new `TransitiveAssets="build"` be simpler than the current proposal?

I find this a bit confusing from the summary: 

> Currently `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options take precedence over `PrivateAssets` asset control option when creating package, so in many cases `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options completely eclipse the `PrivateAssets` option so doesn't let assets flow to consuming parent project.

I think this is saying that when a PackageReference has `IncludeAssets="all" PrivateAssets="compile"` the end result is that the `PrivateAssets="compile"` gets ignored, because `IncludeAssets="all"` eclipses it. Is that right?

Could the customer just stop adding `IncludeAssets="all"`?  (`<PackageReference Include="MyPkg" Version="1.0.0" PrivateAssets="compile" />`, no need for IncludeAssets at all).

I'm jet lagged, feeling quite tired, so I'm sorry if I'm missing something obvious. But I just don't feel like I really understand what exactly is trying to be solved.

Reviewer 2: I think the best description of IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets and PrivateAssets is in https://github.com/NuGet/docs.microsoft.com-nuget/issues/2716#issuecomment-1092223183. 

As a project, `IncludeAssets` and `ExcludeAssets` indicate what I consume from a package. (EffectiveInclude)
As a project, `PrivateAssets` (today in combination with EffectiveInclude) indicates what projects that reference me consume. 

The ask is that EffectiveInclude is not combined with PrivateAssets

Author: Thank you.

Author: Considering we have [same topic thread](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1044784151), I'm resolving this one.

We couldn't make this default experience because it'll break customers who rely on current behavior.

> ## Explanation

Reviewer 3: There needs to be a section about how `dotnet add package` and Installing packages via Visual Studio (PMC's `Install-Package` or PM UI) will add `PrivateAssets="all"` when a package's nuspec declares it a development dependency.

If this proposal goes ahead as planned (project level property to change `PrivateAssets`'s meaning to "assets to flow transitively" instead of the existing "assets to not flow transitively"), then whoever implements this fearture needs to additionally change both `dotnet add package` and VS package install, to detect when this project level property is enabled and change the include/private/exclude assets to keep the intent of "development package" (package will not be a dependency if proejct is packed).  Otherwise, this is a breaking change.

Reviewer: > There needs to be a section about how dotnet add package and Installing packages...

That seems irrelevant to this feature. I don't know why we'd document it here.

> project level property to change PrivateAssets's meaning to "assets to flow transitively" instead of the existing "assets to not flow transitively"

That is not at all what this feature is about, which I elaborate on in a reply to one of your other comments.

Reviewer 3: I think I'm starting to get it.  The opt-in feature would make `PrivateAssets` be the exclusion list for the dependency when the package is packed, regardless of `IncludeAssets` and `ExcludeAssets`, right?

Reviewer: Right. Also (hopefully) it will impact parent projects (P2Ps that reference this project) -- not just folks consuming it via PackageReference.

Reviewer 2: > Right. Also (hopefully) it will impact parent projects (P2Ps that reference this project) -- not just folks consuming it via PackageReference.

Agreed. In fact, I'd go as far to say that it has to work that way.

Author: Resolving this thread considering we have enough consensus on what problem we're solving.

For the following table assume `PackPrivateAssetsFlow` is set `true` when creating package, iterating possible scenarios (not full list) for consuming parent project.

| Asset flowing to parent project | New feature enabled | Possible downside |
|-----------------------|--------------|-----------------|
| compile | Expose new code, auto complete, intellicode, intellisense | Compile error due to naming ambiguity, run time error, NU1605 error |
| runtime | Let provide new runtime dependency | Run time error |
| build | Enable msbuild imports | Build fails due to property/target value change |
| analyzers | Code analyzers work | n/a |

#### Examples

##### Case 1

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PackPrivateAssetsFlow>True</PackPrivateAssetsFlow>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="build" />
  </ItemGroup>

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">

>         <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" exclude="Runtime,Build,Native,Analyzers,BuildTransitive" />

Reviewer 3: I tried the example, copying the PropertyGroup and ItemGroup into a csproj, but the generated nuspec contains `<dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />`.  This was with the 7.0.100 .NET SDK.

Reviewer: In my recent experience, there's reason to believe the results are non-deterministic. Sometimes I'm getting All and other times I get some filtered down list.

Reviewer 2: > I tried the example, copying the PropertyGroup and ItemGroup into a csproj, but the generated nuspec contains `<dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />`. This was with the 7.0.100 .NET SDK.

I get the same thing. I think this is a bad example.

> In my recent experience, there's reason to believe the results are non-deterministic. Sometimes I'm getting All and other times I get some filtered down list.

I think there's something not working correct buildTransitive, so if you only exclude build things seem to get weird.

I think *this* example is likely incorrect and a bug. 

I'd definitely check how pack worked in before 5.0 of NuGet, so 2.1.500 SDK, https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/consume-packages/package-references-in-project-files#controlling-dependency-assets. 

I think that's a separate bug that may need to be addressed that's really really messing with the test cases and example we're trying to use here.

Author: Yeah, this bug is quite confusion hard to repro.
Here is minimum repro: [6938.zip](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/files/10197817/6938.zip)
Hopefully it's not the one of the things works on my machine. 🤷 
Please open `refissue>>refissue.sln`, then pack `refissue` project. Please inspect nuspec file in nupkg.

Reviewer 2: @erdembayar 

The uploaded example uses `IncludeAssets="build"`.

The example here says `ExcludeAssets="build"`

Author: I changed spec example `IncludeAssets="build"`, not sure what happened with repro steps, I hope there is no other bug around this code.

      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">

>         <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />

Reviewer 3: The location of these docs is obscure, but this doc says: https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/nuget/create-packages/select-assemblies-referenced-by-projects

>  Note that the default private assets when none is supplied is `contentfiles;build;analyzers`

(although I think it might be a bug in the docs, I don't think that `analyzers` are in the default private assets, but I'm not confident).

This proposal is changing the defaults. While it could be argued that it's not technically a breaking change, I'm concerned about it.

The design of PackageReference is that `build` is for direct references only, and `buildTransitive` is for both direct and transitive packages. Removing `build` from the default exclude might cause problems, and removing `contentFiles` from the default exclude might cause unwanted content to start being included in package consumers projects.

Reviewer 2: analyzers are in the default, they're just not implemented yet.

Reviewer: Changing the default is not a goal, @zivkan. In this example, `include="All"` is present in the nuspec file because `PrivateAssets="none"` is specified on the PackageReference, which overrides any default.

Reviewer 3: Ok, thanks. I think I'm starting to understand the intended outcome for the feature.

  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0" />
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

### Technical explanation

We already have a [logic](hhttps://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets`, we just change precedence on that logic depending on opt-in property.

## Drawbacks

<!-- Why should we not do this? -->
- Might break some consuming projects, that is why it's opt-in feature. See table above for more details.

## Rationale and alternatives

<!-- Why is this the best design compared to other designs? -->
<!-- What other designs have been considered and why weren't they chosen? -->
<!-- What is the impact of not doing this? -->

> - We could make it per package level control metadata. But could be hard to use if the customer want to opt-in for all package references in current project.

Reviewer 2: As mentioned above, we want the opt-in should only be on the project level.

Author: I'll remove this one.

Reviewer 3: Can someone link to where there was a discussion about why we want the opt-in to be at the project level?  Because I very much disagree.  If a project uses SourceLink, GitVersioning, or other build-related packages, package authors won't want those packages to suddenly become package dependencies.

Reviewer: @zivkan this won't cause all package references to appear as dependencies. The project-level switch only controls whether there is a strange overlap between IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets and PrivateAssets. You should already be setting `PrivateAssets="all"` on the package references you mention, so this project-level switch will have no impact on these.
This new switch will make it possible to set PrivateAssets _and_ Include/Exclude attributes independently of each other, giving you *more* control -- not less.

Reviewer 3: Well, I feel really thick because this spec is not clear to me 😢

Author: Based on Andrew's [comment](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1044661396), I'm resolving this.

# Opt-in experience for PrivateAssets and ExcludeAssets options are independent

- Author Name <https://github.com/erdembayar>
- Start Date 2022-12-07
- GitHub Issue <https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938>
- GitHub PR <https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4976>

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph description of the proposal. -->
Currently asset consumption via `PrivateAssets` option experience for assets from transitive package in a project/package is not deterministic for parent consuming project, here `PrivateAssets` option calculation is not independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option.

> This proposal introduces new a `PrivateAssetIndependent` opt-in property to make `PrivateAssets` option independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option.

Reviewer 3: from https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1043946068:

> The name PackPrivateAssetsFlow would need some workshopping given the feedback.

(the name was then changed to `PrivateAssetIndependent`)

I think it's worthwhile thinking of more ideas, because I think `PrivateAssetIndependent` only makes sense to people who have read https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938. Trying to put myself in the mindset of a customer who has not read that github issue, I don't think most people would guess it's related to which assets get excluded in transitive packages.

I think all my suggests names are too long, but something like `PrivateAssetsDefineTransitiveFlow`? `PrivateAssetsExcludeTransitiveFlow`? `UsePrivateAssetsForDependencies`? `DependenciesFlowViaPrivateAssets`? `TransitiveFlowViaPrivateAssets`? `DependenciesFlowWithPrivateAssetsOnly`? `TransitiveAssetFlowWithPrivateAssets`? If we don't want to limit ourselves to true/false values, maybe `TransitiveAssetFlow` with default value `Calculated`, and opt-in `PrivateAssets`?

I kinda hate all my own suggestions, except the last one, but I'm guessing most people would prefer true/false values, not a custom enum. But I think that without context about what "independent" means, I think they're clearer to understand, more likely that someone who knows nothing about the feture might have a chance of guessing what it means. Although, maybe the name doesn't matter. None of them are super obvious, so customers will probably need to look up docs regardless of what the name is.

Author: Thank you for your suggestion. I'll wait if other folks have any preference between `PrivateAssetIndependent` vs `Suggestions` or one of the above suggestions. I welcome anyone can come up with better naming suggestion.

Reviewer: How about `ExcludedAssetsMayFlowTransitively`?

Author: @NuGet/nuget-client @JonDouglas
Any other suggestions for better naming for new propery?

Reviewer 2: I like `DependenciesFlowWithPrivateAssetsOnly` or `DependencyAssetsFlowWithPrivateAssetsOnly`.

So many of the other ones raise a lot of questions.

Author: We had meeting in beginning of Jan, we discussed about adding new `metadata` called `PublicAssets` to compliment the `PrivateAssets`, that way we don't break existing users of `PrivateAssets` and `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets`.

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively (default)|Flows transitively (PrivateAssetIndependent=true)
--|--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅ | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌
🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ | ✅
🔲 | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌

Notice how transitive flow is controlled exclusively by the `PrivateAssets` value when `PrivateAssetIndependent` is set to `true`.

#### Examples

##### Case 1 for PackageReference

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PrivateAssetIndependent>True</PrivateAssetIndependent>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="build" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" exclude="Runtime,Compile,Native,Analyzers,BuildTransitive" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">

>         <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />

Reviewer 3: I think all the examples should use fake package IDs, like `Contoso.A`, otherwise I don't think this is a good example, because the same outcome is already achievable with `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32` by doing `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" />`.

Looking at the package on nuget.org with NuGet Package Explorer, the package only contains two assets, `build` and `analyzers`. However, analyzers don't currently work via `project.assets.json`, so `IncludeAssets="build"` doesn't prevent the analyzers from being used in the current project. By removing `IncludeAssets` from the `PackageReference`, with today's NuGet it prevents all the other non-build assets being excluded in the dependency.

Author: Thank you for your suggestion.

> I think all the examples should use fake package IDs, like Contoso.A,

Good point. Personally, I like something tangible real examples which quickly repo and see what problem it's solving, but abstract/fake id `Contoso.A` requires previous background knowledge/experience to process what problem it's solving. What other folks are thinking about this?

> same outcome is already achievable with Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32 by doing <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" />.

Gist of this spec is both `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` and `PrivateAssets` are used together scenario, not important exactly which assets are flowing transitively, in one case nothing is flowing. What other folks are thinking about this?

Reviewer: I like the real package ID because of the copy-paste-testability of the spec as well.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PrivateAssetIndependent>True</PrivateAssetIndependent>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="all" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before changing, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset doesn't flow to ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props file in obj folder.

After change, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset flow to ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props file in obj folder.

### Technical explanation

We already have a [logic](hhttps://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets` for pack operation, we just make logic depending on opt-in property.

## Drawbacks

<!-- Why should we not do this? -->
- Might break some consuming projects, that is why it's opt-in feature. See table in #functional-explanation above for more details.

> ## Rationale and alternatives

Reviewer 3: How about an alternative of adding a new metadata on PackageReference items?

Something like `TransitiveAssets` or `ExcludeTransitiveAssets`?  I think this makes it much easier for a customer who has never read the docs or github issue on the feature could guess what it does.

Example 1 would then change to `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" IncludeAssets="build" ExcludeTransitiveAssets="none" />`

Author: Sure, added it. Previously discussed about it [here](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1043079630).

Reviewer 3: The comment you linked to is about something different. It's asking if the opt-in should be via item metadata or a project property, but it's otherwise maintaining the same fundamental design of changing how Include/Private/Exclude Assets are used to calculate package dependency asset flow via an opt-in flag.

My proposal avoids needing opt-in, or changing existing behaviour. Instead, a new keyword will set the asset transitive flow when specified.

I'm trying to think what's easier for customers who are not multi-year experts of .NET and MSBuild to understand. Basically, "What would be easier to document" is the same question. Also, what will be easier for us to support when customers create bug reports. We very often ask customers for more information, or for a sample reproduction, when customers report problems. If we see a bug report with `<PackageReference TransitiveAssets="..."` we immidiately know the customer is using this feature. Many customers don't know that `Directory.Build.props` exist, so wouldn't know to check before filing a bug report, or including it a bug report.

There is at least one (significant?) drawback to the idea though. @AArnott said he wanted to opt in entire repos, which is easy with the project property opt-in. But if transitive flow is specified by a new item metadata, then every PackageReference that wants to change the default will need to be updated. However, this is just one customer feedback. There was one other customer who engaged in the home issue, but their issue was resolved using existing features, so they don't need this new feature after all. So, I don't know if customers will want to opt-in entire projects or specific PackageReferences. A sample size of 1 isn't enough to generalize to all .NET developers. Having said that, the feature request only got 6 upvotes, so it's probably a feature that isn't going to be widely used. Maybe a sample size of one is representative of the other 5.

Author: Hopefully I captured your concern correctly [here](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/commits/72bcb2c814896d1c8ab076087762a8865a35fa2f). I'll keep this discussion open until others return from holidays.

Author: @NuGet/nuget-client @AArnott @zivkan 
Just case if folks are interested, I can show difference between 2 approaches:

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively (default)|Flows transitively (PrivateAssetIndependent=true)|Flows transitively (TransitiveAssets="build")
--|--|--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅ | ✅ | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅
🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ | ✅ | ✅
🔲 | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌ | ✅

1. Currently in our spec we added `PrivateAssetsIndependent` property, we only set `<PrivateAssetIndependent>True</PrivateAssetIndependent>` once in project/solution to opt-into the experience, we don't change existing `PackageReference`. Please see `column 4` in the above table.

    Upside 
    - With this approach we don't need much work for opt-in the existing solution and get consistent expectation for asset flow.
    - If make this one default experience later then it's easy.
    
    Downside
    - No `packagereference` level fine control but considering @AArnott wanted to opt-in entire repos it's fine.
    - Customer, need to know how IncludeAsset and ExcudeAsset combination works. Personally, I feel it's not big issue, it's simple boolean [and](https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/5b0ee2562df6cf2c66cc9905a8a65f2b09ea5473/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/RestoreCommand/Utility/MSBuildRestoreUtility.cs#L129) operation between them, probably we just need to improve our docs to explain this.

2. Alternative idea would be adding yet another metadata `TransitiveAssets` which like existing `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` metadata, only for control transitive asset flow. Please see `column 5` in the above table.

    Upside 
    - We get `PackageReference` level fine control.
    - Explicitly set which type of assets can flow. `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" IncludeAssets="build" TransitiveAssets="compile;build,analyzers" />`
    
    Downside
    - Hard to opt-in existing repo/solution, need to add this all the packagereferences manually. But it's easy for opt-in new repos.
    - We get consistent expectation for `packagereferences` opted in with this new metadata. But for non-opted-in case in below case for `transitive` assets still flows to parent project for packagereferences (IncludeAsset=☑️, PrivateAssets=🔲). So that means we can do same thing 2 different ways, we may not have consistent control over which asset flows, unless we may have to pay attention on how IncludeAsset and ExcudeAsset combination works, technically it's same downside we mentioned in above approach. 

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/210456271-5453d900-44c9-41b1-bfc9-46946b7b6e5d.png)

# Opt-in experience for PrivateAssets and ExcludeAssets options are independent

- Author Name <https://github.com/erdembayar>
- Start Date 2022-12-07
- GitHub Issue <https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938>
- GitHub PR <https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4976>

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph description of the proposal. -->

> Currently asset consumption via `PrivateAssets` option experience for assets from transitive package in a project/package is not deterministic for parent consuming project, here `PrivateAssets` option calculation is not independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option.

Reviewer 2: nit: Not super relevant since I see there's been lots of discussion since I was out, but I don't really get what you mean by it not being deterministic. 
It is deterministic. It works a certain, but the ask to change that/allow for another option.

Author: @nkolev92 
Thank you for your review, I red marked the scenario in question. It explains why we need yet another metadata to enable this scenario explicitly.
![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/229653803-5ae04f68-eaff-4a6d-8bfd-bc907f16c6d9.png)

Author: Yes, you're right it was deterministic only problem was not controlled by author as they want, changed the wording to `not fully controllable by the project author for parent consuming project`.

> Currently asset consumption via `PrivateAssets` option experience for assets from transitive package in a project/package is not deterministic for parent consuming project, here `PrivateAssets` option calculation is not independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option, if an asset is not consumed in current project then it doesn't flow up the regardless of `PrivateAssets` option.

Reviewer: > is not deterministic

I think it is actually deterministic, in that the behavior is defined, consistent and predictable. It just doesn't have the behavior that we sometimes need. In a build, non-deterministic behavior is often a bug, but that isn't really the case here, so I'd suggest changing your wording. Perhaps "is not fully controllable by the project author".

> This proposal introduces new a boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata to improve experience for `PrivateAssets` option to make it independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option, it'll make assets specified in `PrivateAssets` will flow regardless of `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option.

Reviewer: > it'll make assets specified in `PrivateAssets` will flow

Actually the opposite: All assets _not_ specified in `PrivateAssets` will flow when the new metadata is set.
I don't mean to be nit-picky, but given the inverting nature of the metadata and the confusion in this area already, we should probably be as precise and accurate as the problem space requires.

Author: You're right, I did the example below correctly, somehow messed up the explanation.

In below both `Consumption via package reference` and `Consumption via project reference` sub-sections are explaining same things for 2 different scenarios. So, I intentionally choose bit examples in them to expose what problem we're solving with this new opt-in feature.

> ### Consumption via package reference

Reviewer 2: This section contains great amount of detail, but I think it's more of a motivation as it doesn't really talk about the change much, but rather the current behavior :) 
Not too relevant, but I just finished reading the section and I got to `motivation` which made me go, what was all this about.

Author: > This section contains great amount of detail, but I think it's more of a motivation as it doesn't really talk about the change much, but rather the current behavior :)

Well, in previous comments folks asked me about it, in future it serves exactly what problem it's solving. For many people it was kind of black box. I can move the `motivation` above this one if you wish.

Reviewer 2: I'd just not have it in the summary. 

During our discussion yesterday/few days ago, I mentioned the summary should be short. This content can be helpful, but it's not summary, it's part motivation/technical background, part functional/technical explanation. 

My primary feedback is really that the summary should be super small. I think the above, coupled with the feedback provided slims it down enough where it's very understandable what you're proposing.

> The `IncludeAssets`/`ExcludeAssets`, and `PrivateAssets` metadata on `PackageReference` items control two different features. Firstly, which assets from a package that are included in the current project. Secondly, whether the assets will be listed in the package's dependency assets, for those assets to flow transitively, if the project is packed.

Reviewer: > if the project is packed.

This suggests `PrivateAssets` only applies when packed, but in fact it also influences parent projects (P2Ps).

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/commits/dae50f767c777b7a14695db8f20a9ae9e4afb96b

> For example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0" PrivateAssets="all" />` means "Include the default assets in the current project, but if packed, all of the assets are excluded, so this package will not be a dependency".

Reviewer: All 3 of these examples similarly use "but if packed" verbiage when IMO it should be "but if packed or consumed via a ProjectReference"

Author: Addressed in https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/commits/dae50f767c777b7a14695db8f20a9ae9e4afb96b

Another example, `<PackageReference Include="NuGet.Protocol" Version="6.4.0" PrivateAssets="compile" />` means "include the default assets in the current project, but if packed, the "compile" asset should be excluded from the package dependency, so that my package's dependencies do not leak APIs into projects using my package".

A third example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Build" Version="17.0" ExcludeAssets="runtime" />` means "in the current project, make the `compile` assets available (so both intellisense and the compiler can access APIs from the package), but `Microsoft.Build`'s dlls are not copied to `bin` on build (`runtime` assets), and if the project is packed, then `runtime` assets also be excluded for the `Microsoft.Build` dependency for any project that references the current project's package.

> However, a scenario that is missing is "exclude a package asset from a current project, but do not exclude it from the dependency when the current project is packed", i.e

Author: Here both `### Consumption via package reference` and `### Consumption via project reference` are explaining same things for 2 different scenarios. So, I intentionally choose bit examples in them to expose what problem we're solving with this new opt-in feature.

Reviewer 4: This comment is so good it should be on the spec.

Author: Address in commit https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/commits/c76de0717df45fd24885e1f65006f036df43e3cc

`<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta"  PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />`.
This missing feature is more obvious when looking at a project/flow matrix below (see 3rd row), because `PrivateAssets` is not independent from `IncludeAssets`. We want to change that with opt-in property, it would let assets flow to the parent project on that case.

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively
--|--|--
yes|yes|yes
yes|no|no
no|yes|***no***
no|no|no

In above table `IncludeAssets` equals `yes` means `all` or `build` etc, but `no` means `none` or another non-intersecting asset with `PrivateAssets`.

> `PrivateAssets` equals `yes` means `all` or `build` etc, but `no` means `none` or another non-intersecting asset with `IncludeAssets`.

Reviewer: The idea of a table seems great, but this is quite confusing to me. You say that `PrivateAssets` equals `yes` means `all`, but that should mean the first row doesn't flow transitively because `PrivateAssets="all"` means the reference doesn't flow. So I think the table or explanation is wrong. Further, why use `yes` and `no` in the table when you have to then reinterpret those terms in the next paragraph? Why not just use the terms we're all familiar with in the table?

```suggestion
Let's consider some particular asset (e.g. `build`, `compile`, or even `all`) that may appear in the list of `IncludeAssets` or `PrivateAssets` metadata. When it appears in one or both of these lists, they may interact to control whether the asset flows transitively. The ☑️ symbol means this asset is listed in that metadata, and 🔲 means it is _not_ listed. Note that presence in PrivateAssets indicates that an asset should *not* flow transitively.

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively
--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌
🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ (unexpected?)
🔲 | ☑️ | ❌

Note how `PrivateAssets` can only subtract assets from the assets listed by `IncludeAssets`. It cannot *add* them by setting `PrivateAssets=none`. This means (without the feature described in this spec) that there is simply no way to flow an asset transitively that is not also directly consumed by the project.
```

### Consumption via project reference

> The above observation applies Project2Project references for parent project too when `restore/build` operation happens.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The above observation applies to `ProjectReference` from 'parent' projects too when `restore/build` operation happens.
```

> 🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ (unexpected?)

Reviewer 2: This should flow transitively. `not listed` means defaults, so `all` for include assets and `none` for exclude assets.

Author: I tested it, without following PR then the props file didn't bubble up transitively, see left side of comparison.

```
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none"  ExcludeAssets="none" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/8766776/229657746-6e3a7f6b-3ff0-40b0-af08-5deb6e7bc54b.png)

Let's say the current project is `LibraryProj.csproj` and parent project has `<ProjectReference Include="..\LibraryProj.csproj" />` reference to it.

For example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0" PrivateAssets="none" />` in `LibraryProj.csproj` means  "Include the default assets in the current project, but all assets flow to parent project".

> Another example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0"  IncludeAssets="none" />` in `LibraryProj.csproj` means  "Consume the no assets in the current project, but default assets flow  to parent project".

Reviewer: Touch up on language:
```suggestion
Another example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0"  IncludeAssets="none" />` in `LibraryProj.csproj` means "Consume no assets in the current project, but default assets flow to parent project".
```

But I'm confused by this. Your earlier table suggested that `IncludeAssets="none"` precluded any possibility of assets flowing to the parent project, but on this line you seem to be suggesting that 'default' assets *would* flow. Which assets would those be?

> However if we combine above examples where both cases some assets flowing to parent project, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta"  PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />`, currently experience is no asset flows to into parent project even though it requested all assets flow to parent project (see above table 3rd row), because `PrivateAssets` is not independent from `IncludeAssets`. We want to change that with opt-in property, it would let assets flow to the parent project on that case.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
However if we combine above examples where both cases some assets flowing to parent project, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta"  PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />`, the current experience is that no asset flows into parent project even though it requested all assets flow to parent project (see above table 3rd row), because `PrivateAssets` is not independent from `IncludeAssets`. We want to change that with opt-in property, it would let assets flow to the parent project in that case.
```

> Another example, `<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.SourceLink.GitHub" Version="1.0.0"  IncludeAssets="none" />` in `LibraryProj.csproj` means "Consume no assets in the current project, but default assets flow to parent project".

Reviewer 2: Given that we're describing the current behavior, we should clarify here that nothing will flow today.

Author: If I'm not mistaken in this case defaults assets `contentfiles;analyzers;build` would flow to parent.

A package author should be able to deterministically decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as package. It enables parent projects to consume transitive packages without having to directly reference them, therefore it reduces the number of packages developers need to keep track of. So, it'll give more flexible control to the package author, not less.
We couldn't make this default experience because it'll break customers who rely on current behavior.

In addition to the above code author should be able to deterministically decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as project reference(P2Ps that reference this project).
If the current project consuming any packages, then it can be transitively consumed by parent project if code author wants to.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

> The new ` PrivateAssetIndependent` property let only `PrivateAssets` option to decide which assets flow to consuming parent project, but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json` lock file, i.e it doesn't change `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` calculation for current project.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The new `PrivateAssetIndependent` property causes the `PrivateAssets` metadata to exclusively decide which assets flow to consuming parent project, but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json` lock file, i.e it doesn't change `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` calculation for current project.
```

> A package author should be able to deterministically decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as package. It enables parent projects to consume transitive packages without having to directly reference them, therefore it reduces the number of packages developers need to keep track of. So, it'll give more flexible control to the package author, not less.

Reviewer: Avoid 'deterministically' here because we're not changing determinism, but rather increasing flexibility.

```suggestion
A package author should be able to decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as package. It enables parent projects to consume transitive packages without having to directly reference them, therefore it reduces the number of packages developers need to keep track of. So, it'll give more flexible control to the package author, not less.
```

> We shouldn't break customers who rely on current behavior, that is why're introducing new boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata, which let explicitly set `PrivateAssets`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We shouldn't break customers who rely on current behavior, that is why're introducing new boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata, which lets `PrivateAssets` fully control transitive flow of assets independently of whether they are included in the current project.
```

<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->
The new `PrivateAssetIndependent` property causes the `PrivateAssets` metadata to exclusively decide which assets flow to consuming parent project, but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json` lock file, i.e it doesn't change `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` calculation for current project.

It'll change how `compile, runtime, contentFiles, build, buildMultitargeting, buildTransitive, analyzers, native` dependencies flow into the projects consuming it via `PackageReference` and `ProjectReference` references.

For the following table assume `PrivateAssetIndependent` opt-in property is set `true` in current project, iterating possible scenarios (not full list) for consuming parent project.

> | Asset flowing to parent project | New feature enabled | Possible downside |

Reviewer 2: Feels like this is describing the meaning of assets groups. I'm not sure it's really relevant for what you're trying to do here.

Author: These concepts are only understood by expert level people. I thought having here is important for completeness of the knowledge. We're expecting people [who are new](https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/files#r1052185746) to msbuild should be able to use this new metadata or property.

Author: I removed the how exactly calculation happen part, spec shouldn't include too much technical implementation.

| runtime | Let provide new runtime dependency | Run time error |
| build | Enable msbuild imports | Build fails due to property/target value change |
| analyzers | Code analyzers work | n/a |

> Here is summary for what would change for consuming `parent` project, see 3rd row ***bold*** note.
> 
> Here `IncludeAssets` equals `yes` means `all` or `build` etc, but `no` means `none` or another non-intersecting asset with `PrivateAssets`.
> 
> Here `PrivateAssets` equals `yes` means `all` or `build` etc, but `no` means `none` or another non-intersecting asset with `IncludeAssets`.
> 
> Before change for any given `asset`:
> IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively
> --|--|--
> yes|yes|yes
> yes|no|no
> no|yes|***no***
> no|no|no
> 
> After change for any given `asset`:
> IncludeAssets|PrivateAsset|Flows transitively
> --|--|--
> yes|yes|yes
> yes|no|no
> no|yes|***yes***
> no|no|no

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Recall our table from earlier that shows which assets flow based on listing some asset in `IncludeAssets` and/or `PrivateAssets`. Below we add a 4th column that reveals the new flow behavior when the new behavior is activated:

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively (default)|Flows transitively (PrivateAssetIndependent=true)
--|--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅ | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌
🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ | ✅
🔲 | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌

Notice how transitive flow is controlled exclusively by the `PrivateAssets` value when `PrivateAssetIndependent` is set to `true`.
```

> | compile | Expose new code, auto complete, intellicode, intellisense | Compile error due to naming ambiguity, run time error, NU1605 error |

Reviewer 2: How could an NU1605 error happen? 
The package was already in the graph no? It just changes the assets being consumed.

Author: I don't remember why I added it, probably my mistake, removing it.

> In addition to the above code author should be able to deterministically decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as project reference(P2Ps that reference this project).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In addition to the above code author should be able to decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as project reference(P2Ps that reference this project).
```

> 🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ | ✅

Reviewer 2: I feel like this is a lacking example. The package was always flowing, but now we have different assets.

Author: Sorry, it was not flowing as expected, please check my another screenshot in line #35.

#### Examples

##### Case 1 for PackageReference

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PrivateAssetIndependent>True</PrivateAssetIndependent>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="build" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">

>         <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" exclude="Runtime,Build,Native,Analyzers,BuildTransitive" />

Reviewer: Why is `Build` excluded here when it `build` is in the `IncludeAssets` list and `PrivateAssets` is set to `none` in the project file?

Author: You're right, just corrected it. https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313/commits/e9a8465cbf5c51d915d16dd3e8e106f3621774bf

      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

##### Case 2 for PackageReference

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
    <PrivateAssetIndependent>True</PrivateAssetIndependent>
  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />    
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0" />
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

##### Case for Project to Project reference

> Package reference in parent `ClassLibrary1` csproj file.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`ProjectReference` in parent `ClassLibrary1` csproj file:
```

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net7.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion

And `PackageReference` in `refissue.csproj` file:

```

> ##### Case for Project to Project reference

Reviewer 2: It'd be great to have the reverse example as well. 

So 1 -> 2, where 1 has the flag enabled, but 2 is the one with privateassets. 

There should be no effect in this case. 

Another example is a 1 -> 2 -> 3, where 3 is the one with the flag and with the special private assets value. 1 and 2 are going to have different values for the package referenced in 3. 

I'd use a compile example because build is in the default `PrivateAssets`.

Author: Ok. Added 2 more examples here. Could you please verify it for me?

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludeAssets="all" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before changing, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset doesn't flow to ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props file in obj folder.

After change, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset flow to ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props file in obj folder.

### Technical explanation

We already have a [logic](hhttps://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets` for pack operation, we just make logic depending on opt-in property.

## Drawbacks

<!-- Why should we not do this? -->
- Might break some consuming projects, that is why it's opt-in feature. See table in #functional-explanation above for more details.

## Rationale and alternatives

<!-- Why is this the best design compared to other designs? -->
<!-- What other designs have been considered and why weren't they chosen? -->
<!-- What is the impact of not doing this? -->

> - We could make it opt-in option in `nuget.config` file, but it doesn't give customer to option to opt in/out for per project level.

Reviewer 4: Why not a property in the project file to opt-in to this feature?

Author: Yes, we're doing exactly that one. `PrivateAssetIndependent` is property in the project file to opt-in to this feature.
Also, you use this in `Directory.Packages.props` file to onboard whole repo into this feature.

> We already have a [logic](hhttps://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets` for pack operation, we just make logic depending on opt-in property.

Reviewer 2: You're missing a call out for the restore side here.

Author: Added

```.net
   <config>
    <add key="PrivateAssetIndependent" value="true" />
  </config>
```

## Prior Art

<!-- What prior art, both good and bad are related to this proposal? -->
<!-- Do other features exist in other ecosystems and what experience have their community had? -->
<!-- What lessons from other communities can we learn from? -->
<!-- Are there any resources that are relevant to this proposal? -->

## Unresolved Questions

<!-- What parts of the proposal do you expect to resolve before this gets accepted? -->
<!-- What parts of the proposal need to be resolved before the proposal is stabilized? -->

> <!-- What related issues would you consider out of scope for this proposal but can be addressed in the future? -->

Reviewer 4: How does this will work with CPM enabled projects? See https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/12270

Author: @jeffkl 
Could you be able to check if my changes affect any of CPM scenarios?

> - We could make it opt-in option in `nuget.config` file, but it doesn't give customer to option to opt in/out for per project level.

Reviewer 2: I'm not suggesting add a nuget.config switch, but feel like the best way for customers to use this feature is on either *all* or *none* of their projects.

Reviewer 3: It's been a while since I thought about this issue, but I remember my preference is that it should be opt-in per project, maybe even per-PackageReference. 😁 

Frankly, I've forgotten why it's important to be able to exclude an asset from the current project, but still have it flow transitively, so I don't feel like it's a very common scenario, so having it "unexpectedly" in all projects in a repo might not be desirable.

Reviewer 2: It's significantly simpler for it to be on a per project level. 

The calculation is not for the PackageReference in question only at pack time, but rather for potential project references as well.

Author: Sure, we had a lot of discussion around this. I learned a lot from the discussion, since we already decided on adding `ExcludedAssetsFlow` at per package reference I'm resolving this comment. Still, someone want to onboard the whole project or solution it's doable using msbuild script/syntax.

# Opt-in experience for PrivateAssets and ExcludeAssets options are independent

- Author Name <https://github.com/erdembayar>
- Start Date 2022-12-07
- GitHub Issue <https://github.com/NuGet/Home/issues/6938>
- GitHub PR <https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/pull/4976>

## Summary

<!-- One-paragraph description of the proposal. -->

> Currently asset consumption via `PrivateAssets` option experience for assets from transitive package in a project/package is not fully controllable by the project author for parent consuming project, here `PrivateAssets` option calculation is not independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option, if an asset is not consumed in current project then it doesn't flow up the regardless of `PrivateAssets` option.

Reviewer 2: nit: You can shorten it. 

Currently, given a package within a project, what assets from the package/project flow transitive to a parent project is determined by PrivateAssets in combination with IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets. In order for an asset to flow the parent, it *has* to be consumed by the current project.

> This proposal introduces new a boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata to improve experience for `PrivateAssets` option to make it independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option, it'll make assets not specified in `PrivateAssets` will flow regardless of `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` option.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This proposal introduces new a boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata to allow for `PrivateAssets` option to be independent from `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` metadata, as it'll allow assets not specified in `PrivateAssets` to flow regardless of `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` metadata.
```

metadata, option...whatever you call it just keep it consistent :)

Below means assets `contentFiles, build, buildMultitargeting, buildTransitive, analyzers, native` excluding `runtime and compile` assets would flow to referencing parent project even though they're not consumed by current project.

> `<PackageReference Include="PackageA" PrivateAssets="Runtime;Compile" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true" IncludeAssets = "none"/>`

Reviewer 2: Great example.

> If `ExcludedAssetsFlow` if not present, then it default false and it's ignored by older tooling. Also, if it has non-boolean value then it would error out.

Reviewer 2: nit: Just say the default value is false or somewhere and this sentence can be removed completely.

> In below both `Consumption via package reference` and `Consumption via project reference` sub-sections are explaining same things for 2 different scenarios in details.

Reviewer 2: nit: Redundant, it's pretty obvious what those 2 are doing :)

However, a scenario that is missing is "exclude a package asset from a current project, but do not exclude it from the dependency when the current project is packed", i.e
`<PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta"  PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" />`.
This missing feature is more obvious when looking at a project/flow matrix below (see 3rd row), because `PrivateAssets` is not independent from `IncludeAssets/PrivateAssets`. We want to change that with opt-in `ExcludedAssetsFlow` boolean metadata, it would let assets flow to the parent project on that case.

Let's consider some particular asset (e.g., `build`, `compile`, or even `all`) that may appear in the list of `IncludeAssets` or `PrivateAssets` metadata. When it appears in one or both of these lists, they may interact to control whether the asset flows transitively. The ☑️ symbol means this asset is listed in that metadata, and 🔲 means it is _not_ listed. Note that presence in PrivateAssets indicates that an asset should *not* flow transitively.

IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively
--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌

> 🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ (unexpected?)

Reviewer 2: I think we disproved this. Can we please remove it. `Unexpected?` doesn't suggest final spec.

🔲 | ☑️ | ❌

Note how `PrivateAssets` can only subtract assets from the assets listed by `IncludeAssets`. It cannot *add* them by setting `PrivateAssets=none`. This means (without the feature described in this spec) that there is simply no way to flow an asset transitively that is not also directly consumed by the project.

> ### Consumption via project reference

Reviewer 2: both, this and the Consumption via package reference sections can be moved to technical/functiona explanation. In this case, they (technically and functional explanation)are pretty equivalent

Author: Sure merged

We shouldn't break customers who rely on current behavior, that is why're introducing new boolean `ExcludedAssetsFlow` metadata, which lets `PrivateAssets` fully control transitive flow of assets independently of whether they are included in the current project.

In addition to the above code author should be able to decide which asset flow to parent consuming projects when this project is consumed as project reference(P2Ps that reference this project).
If the current project is consuming any packages, then it can be transitively consumed by parent project if code author wants to.

## Explanation

### Functional explanation

<!-- Explain the proposal as if it were already implemented and you're teaching it to another person. -->
<!-- Introduce new concepts, functional designs with real life examples, and low-fidelity mockups or  pseudocode to show how this proposal would look. -->

> The new `ExcludedAssetsFlow` boolean metadata complements the `PrivateAssets` metadata to exclusively decide which assets flow to consuming parent project, but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json` lock file, i.e it doesn't change `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` calculation for current project.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The new `ExcludedAssetsFlow` boolean metadata complements the `PrivateAssets` metadata to exclusively decide which assets flow to consuming parent project, but doesn't affect restore experience for current project so there would be no change in `project.assets.json`  file, i.e it doesn't change `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` calculation for current project.
```

LockFile is the type for historical reasons, but it's really "AssetsFile"

It'll change how `compile, runtime, contentFiles, build, buildMultitargeting, buildTransitive, analyzers, native` dependencies flow into the projects consuming it via `PackageReference` and `ProjectReference` references.

For the following table assume `ExcludedAssetsFlow` opt-in metadata is set `true` in a package reference, iterating possible scenarios (not full list) for consuming parent project.

| Asset flowing to parent project | New feature enabled | Possible downside |
|-----------------------|--------------|-----------------|

> | compile | Expose new code, auto complete, intellicode, intellisense | Compile error due to naming ambiguity, run time error |

Reviewer 2: I'm not really sure what this adds. 

I'm not even sure the possible downsides are even possible in some cases.

| runtime | Let provide new runtime dependency | Run time error |
| build | Enable msbuild imports | Build fails due to property/target value change |
| analyzers | Code analyzers work | n/a |

Recall our table from earlier that shows which assets flow based on listing some asset in `IncludeAssets` and/or `PrivateAssets`. Below we add a 4th column that reveals the new flow behavior when the new behavior is activated, notice how transitive flow is controlled exclusively by the `PrivateAssets` value when `ExcludedAssetsFlow` is set to `true` in column3 and row 3:

> IncludeAssets|PrivateAssets|Flows transitively (current)|Flows transitively (ExcludedAssetsFlow=true)

Reviewer 2: The context from the previous table is low here, as now the reader has to look up what asset group is being talked about here.

--|--|--|--
☑️ | 🔲 | ✅ | ✅
☑️ | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌
🔲 | 🔲 | ❌ | ✅
🔲 | ☑️ | ❌ | ❌

#### Examples

##### Case 1 for PackageReference

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>

>     <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="build" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" exclude="Runtime,Compile,Native,Analyzers,BuildTransitive" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

##### Case 2 for PackageReference

Package reference in csproj file.

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>

>     <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

  </PropertyGroup>
  <ItemGroup>

>     <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true" />    

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure how this adds anything different from line 106. 

You say PackageReference vs ProjectReference but you're giving nuspec examples in both.

Author: Removed

  </ItemGroup>
```

Before change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0" />
    </dependencies>
```

After change nuspec file:

```.net
    <dependencies>
      <group targetFramework=".NETStandard2.0">
        <dependency id="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" version="0.2.138-beta" include="All" />
      </group>
    </dependencies>
```

##### Case 1 for Project to Project reference

`ProjectReference` in parent `ClassLibrary1` csproj file:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net7.0</TargetFramework>

>     <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>

Reviewer 2: I'd do a sweep of all the examples, and remove the unnecessary part. 

The spec could probably be at least 100 lines shorter and it'd be faster to read, easier to understand.

Author: Sure, removed unnecessary ceremony part.

    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

And `PackageReference` in `refissue.csproj` file:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta" PrivateAssets="none" IncludeAssets="none" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before changing, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset doesn't flow to `ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `obj` folder.

After change, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset flow to `ClassLibrary1.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `obj` folder.

##### Case 2 for Project to Project reference

`ProjectReference` in parent `ClassLibrary1` csproj file:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net7.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>

>     <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" PrivateAssets="none" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true"/>

Reviewer 2: I think you've already communicated that they're independent. Adding length examples is probably best done in something shorter than a paragraph or a complete section.

I had to look hard at the examples to understand them, but in reality, they're really really close together. 

If you say PrivateAssets and IncludeAssets are independent once, you don't need an example with different values of IncludeAssets, you just one where PrivateAssets and IncludeAssets conflict.

Author: Added the missing scenarios you mentioned in your previous review comments, so I added 2 more in this part of the spec. https://github.com/NuGet/Home/pull/12313#discussion_r1093647328

  </ItemGroup>
```

`ProjectReference` in parent `intermediate` csproj file:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>net7.0</TargetFramework>
    <ImplicitUsings>enable</ImplicitUsings>
    <Nullable>enable</Nullable>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <ProjectReference Include="..\refissue\refissue.csproj" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

And `PackageReference` in `refissue.csproj` file:

```.net
  <PropertyGroup>
    <TargetFramework>netstandard2.0</TargetFramework>
    <VersionSuffix>beta</VersionSuffix>
  </PropertyGroup>

  <ItemGroup>
    <PackageReference Include="Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32" Version="0.2.138-beta"  PrivateAssets="compile" IncludeAssets="none" ExcludedAssetsFlow="true" />
  </ItemGroup>
```

Before changing, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset doesn't flow to `intermediate.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `intermediate/obj` folder or `top.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `top/obj` folder.

After change, `Microsoft.Windows.CsWin32.props` file in `build` asset flow to `intermediate.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `intermediate/obj` folder, but doesn't flow to `top.csproj.nuget.g.props` file in `top/obj` folder.

### Technical explanation

> We already have a [logic](https://github.com/NuGet/NuGet.Client/blob/380415d812681ebf1c8aa0bc21533d4710514fc3/src/NuGet.Core/NuGet.Commands/CommandRunners/PackCommandRunner.cs#L577-L582) that combines `IncludeAssets/ExcludeAssets` options with `PrivateAssets` for pack and restore operation, we just make logic depending on opt-in metadata at package reference.

Author: @nkolev92 
Do you know if have something special for `ProjectReference` than `PackageReference` asset calculation? If yes could you  please give me code pointers?

Reviewer 2: They're treated the same.

## Drawbacks

<!-- Why should we not do this? -->
- Might break some consuming projects, that is why it's per reference opt-in feature. See table in #functional-explanation above for more details.

## Rationale and alternatives

<!-- Why is this the best design compared to other designs? -->
<!-- What other designs have been considered and why weren't they chosen? -->
<!-- What is the impact of not doing this? -->
- We could make it opt-in option in `nuget.config` file, but it doesn't give customer to option to opt in/out for per project level.

```.net
   <config>
    <add key="PublicAssets" value="true" />
  </config>
```

> - Alternatively, we could make it opt-in option as property on the project level but doesn't give fine grained control given that only very few packages need this feature.

Reviewer 2: nit: You're in an alternatives section, you don't need the fluff :)
